From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
For other uses, see Rain (disambiguation) and Rainy (disambiguation).
"Rainfall" redirects here. For the 2009 Japanese/Australian film, see Rain Fall.
"Rainwater" redirects here. For the mathematical pseudonym, see John Rainwater.

Hard rain on a roof

Rain
MENU0:00
Typical sound of rain with thunder
Problems playing this file? See media help.
Part of a series on
Weather
Global tropical cyclone tracks-edit2.jpg
Temperate and polar seasons
Tropical seasons
Storms
Precipitation
Topics
Glossaries
Cumulus clouds in fair weather.jpeg Weather portal
vte
File:Rain falling on road - gnangarra.webm
rain falling on a road
Rain is liquid water in the form of droplets that have condensed from atmospheric water vapor and then become heavy enough to fall under gravity. Rain is a major component of the water cycle and is responsible for depositing most of the fresh water on the Earth. It provides suitable conditions for many types of ecosystems, as well as water for hydroelectric power plants and crop irrigation.

The major cause of rain production is moisture moving along three-dimensional zones of temperature and moisture contrasts known as weather fronts. If enough moisture and upward motion is present, precipitation falls from convective clouds (those with strong upward vertical motion) such as cumulonimbus (thunder clouds) which can organize into narrow rainbands. In mountainous areas, heavy precipitation is possible where upslope flow is maximized within windward sides of the terrain at elevation which forces moist air to condense and fall out as rainfall along the sides of mountains. On the leeward side of mountains, desert climates can exist due to the dry air caused by downslope flow which causes heating and drying of the air mass. The movement of the monsoon trough, or intertropical convergence zone, brings rainy seasons to savannah climes.

The urban heat island effect leads to increased rainfall, both in amounts and intensity, downwind of cities. Global warming is also causing changes in the precipitation pattern globally, including wetter conditions across eastern North America and drier conditions in the tropics. Antarctica is the driest continent. The globally averaged annual precipitation over land is 715 mm (28.1 in), but over the whole Earth it is much higher at 990 mm (39 in).[1] Climate classification systems such as the Köppen classification system use average annual rainfall to help differentiate between differing climate regimes. Rainfall is measured using rain gauges. Rainfall amounts can be estimated by weather radar.

Rain is also known or suspected on other planets, where it may be composed of methane, neon, sulfuric acid, or even iron rather than water.
